## Types of programming languages?
There are three general categories of programming languages you could encounter.

*Also, these are my own wordings for them, take them at face value. Not everyone will understand what you mean when you say these things. It's just how I describe them to everyone that makes sense to me.*
###Scripting languages
Not everyone wants to write business logic in their native language. For applications written in C++, this is especially the case. Scripting languages are *embeddedable* languages that execute logic inside of your source code. This is best described as a game engine written in c++ using [Lua](https://www.lua.org/) for it's game logic such as updating positions or handling collisions.

These scriptable languages are great because they allow you to define a clear entry-point for outside logic that can be used with your software. Sometimes you will write a library that ends up using it's own scripting language, maybe even to extend your software. Maya and Blender use embedded Python to create extensions or macros so artists can make tools that suit their workflows.
###Interpreted Languages
Interpreted languages are languages that are read line-by-line in their original source. While most people will also attribute these types of languages to scripting languages, the semantics are a bit different. These are languages like [Python](https://www.python.org/). 

These languages usually sit on-top of a virtual machine or runtime, which acts as an abstraction for platform-needs. This creates the idea of: write once, run everywhere, which Java is so proud of.

###Compiled Languages
Compiled languages are languages that turn source code into machine code instructions that are executed by the CPU. These are assembled into a native executable such as .exe or .dmg. These types of languages are the C families (C, C++, C#).

### Virtual Machines / Runtimes
So, some of the languages listed above can fit into multiple categories. While Javascript is a scripting language, it can also be an interpreted language with runtimes such as [NodeJS](https://nodejs.org/en/). C# will compile the code into an executable that requires the .NET framework to run. Java requires the JVM which is installed through the JRE. *Though, if you are using the JDK, you already have the JRE packaged.* C# and Java have their own runtimes as well. dotNet (.NET) is a run-time that sits on the Common Language Runtime, often referred to as CLR, that allows different languages to compile to the same type of executable. When someone wants to run that executable, they need to install the CLR, which is the .Net Framework. 

dotNET allows you to not only write C#, but also Visual Basic, F#, [and many more. . .](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_CLI_languages) For right now, dotNet's CLR does not run on anything that Micro$oft doesn't own the soul of. With the release of C# 6 and the Roslyn compiler becoming open-source software, they are looking to make the dotNET family more inclusive. For now, you need to rely on [Mono](http://www.mono-project.com/) to run dotNET executables on unix systems.

Java's Virtual Machine also has several different languages that run on it. Python and Ruby can run with Jython and JRuby. The JVM also has:

- Groovy, which the build system, Gradle uses
- Scala, which a good amount of web devs use with PlayFramework
- Kotlin, which I use more often now
- Clojure, which google created and other functional nuts use
- Xtend, which I have my eye on, but not many use
- Ceylon, which many had deemed too slow for use, but is an interesting language none-the-less

You should look up other JVM languages when you get the chance. They probably won't be used in any workplace you'd find near here. I strongly doubt Geisinger will use any of these.

###Why are Virtual Machine Runtimes needed?
You know, the best way I can describe this is by using a real-world example. Bare with me on this. Let's say modern travel equipment did not exist. America's **(Windows)** roads are lava, Europe's **(Linux)** roads are water, and Asia **(Mac)** has monorails. You can't take a car made for American roads and run it on a monorail. So what do you do? Do you try to make a car that can run on every road possible? What if that was possible?

Meet the JVM. Otherwise called the Java Vehicle Mobilization. *Couldn't think of a better pun, man.* The JVM takes the roads made of lava, cools them down and places heat-resistance asphalt on top of them. It takes the European roads, raises the ground level and makes flat dirt roads. For the Asian countries, it takes the monorail and adds a structurally sound suspension roadway above the monorail tracks.

Now, Java built cars with rubber tires **(JARs)** that can run on their own roads that they assembled on-top of the existing roads in each region. They have solved the problem of making a car that can run on any environment.

This really terrible example hopes to show that with a runtime or virtual machine, you can write code that access the machine natively depending on it's implementation. When you access the file system in Java, it works differently on each platform, but you are guaranteed that if you try to access a file, Java will make it happen depending on that platforms unique system.

## What about functional or object-oriented programming?
Functional programming is not a new concept, despite what many people believe. Sure, many new languages, especially on the web-front, have taken a liking to functional programming such as Elm, Clojure for Java and F# for dotNET. I won't write about it here. You'll likely come across functional reactive programming if you do any searching, but for now, it's just another paradigm. C is functional, while C++ is object-oriented. Functional programming will make things interesting for you later in your programming career. Filtering, mapping and transforming over streams is fun once you understand how. [Rx](http://reactivex.io/) has bindings for almost any language imaginable.